# Real-Time Traffic Control System By Using Object Detection Algorithms

Traffic congestion became a serious problem in Egypt with numerous buses, vans, and cars crowding the streets. According to statistics, the capital Cairo hosts more than 19 million inhabitants, and this number is expected to increase to 24 million by 2027 [1]. During peak hours, reaching important meetings on time becomes challenging, as travelers should anticipate at least double the normal time for a trip. The average speed on major streets has decreased by half, where the expected speed of 60 to 80 km/h is reduced to 15 to 20 km/h. Some local roads in central Cairo and downtown are even worse, making it sometimes faster to take short trips on foot.

Traffic congestion not only wastes time but also has a significant impact on the economy, including wasted fuel, health issues due to poor air quality, and accidents. Egypt wastes more than 8 billion USD per year in traffic congestion, which is higher than 4% of the country's GDP [2].

Solving traffic congestion by using fixed cycle traffic lights doesn't address the problem in all situations. In some cases, a police officer replaces the traffic lights, controlling the movement based on the road's availability and situation rather than adhering to the preset traffic light schedule. This is where the idea of self-adaptive smart traffic control using neural networks comes into play, offering high accuracy and speed. Once trained, the system can predict road conditions quickly by monitoring road availability through cameras instead of human eyes and processing the information through machine learning instead of the human brain.

This solution is more available than manual control because it can work throughout the day, less effective than automatic control, which is not based on the constant value loaded in the timer, and less expensive than electronic sensors, as it doesn't depend on expensive sensors. Implementing this solution will decrease traffic, air pollution, waiting time, the number of accidents, and fuel consumption [3].

The proposed system can detect different vehicle types and varied light conditions. It can detect vehicles in the morning sunlight or at night with good or poor light conditions. The detection results are passed to the scheduling algorithm to determine the green and red lights for the road lanes based on the vehicle count and its weight. Then, the red and green timers count down until the yellow timer counts down, repeating the detection operation in a loop.

This traffic control system was able to achieve real-time traffic situation detection and make the most efficient decision to manage the intersected traffic lanes without waiting for a fixed time, which often leads to overwaiting for cars when they are less than the suggested time or when some cars have to wait for two turns in the traffic because the car count was higher than the suggested time [3].
